A brother feels guilty because he did things before his baptism.
A parent feels guilty because his children left the truth.
A sister feels guilty because she divorced her own faithful husband.
What do all these people have in common?
They suffer from inappropriate guilt.
Now, a comedian joked religion is basically guilt with different holidays.
Why is it that religious people carry so much guilt?
And can anything good come from it?
The Bible, of course, associates guilt with laws, sin, and transgression.
Open your Bibles with me to Galatians 3 and verse 19.
And notice the effect the mosaic law had on the Israelites.
Paul says, why then the law?
It was added to make transgressions manifest.
So the law reminded God's people every day that they were sinners.
Jehovah's law was perfect. No one could live up to it.
So for the Israelites, feeling guilty was inescapable.
Now, why would Jehovah do that? Why give them a law to make them feel guilty?
Well, there were at least three reasons.
First, we should feel guilty when we've done something wrong.
It reminds us of Jehovah's position as universal sovereign and his righteous standards.
And it confirms that our conscience is working.
Second, we can all admit that there are times when we may not have done something wrong yet,
but we may be wanting to.
And at that point, guilt is our friend.
In some ways, it's like physical pain.
Physical pain makes us aware of a potential health problem.
And the emotional pain of guilt alerts us to the fact that there may be potential moral or spiritual problems.
And finally, third, when someone confesses his guilt,
it helps both the wrongdoer and the victim.
The victim brings the guilty person relief through forgiveness.
And it makes the victim feel better when he sees that the guilty one loves him enough to apologize.
Unfortunately, we can feel guilty even without being guilty.
And inappropriate guilt often leads people to emotional distress and sometimes even harsh self-criticism.
Let's consider three situations where inappropriate guilt can paralyze us and also what we can do to get rid of it.
The first situation is what we might call persistent guilt.
This is guilt for something you did, repented over, even received forgiveness for, but you can't forgive yourself.
So you continue to ruminate over the matter and it saps your joy and strength.
What can you do?
Well, consider the apostle Paul.
There were times when the things he did in the past upset him.
How did he handle those feelings?
To answer, let's read together, 1 Corinthians 15 and verses 9 and 10.
As we know, Paul, before he was baptized, persecuted Christ's brothers.
He even supported the stoning of Stephen.
How do you think those memories made him feel?
Well, notice what he says in verse 9.
For I am the least of the apostles and I am not worthy of being called an apostle because I persecuted the congregation of God.
Now, when you're in a position of responsibility like Paul was, feelings of unworthiness like this can be devastating.
Satan tries to make you doubt yourself whether you still have God's approval in your life.
And he often does this when you're most vulnerable, when you're already crushed under the weight of your own failures and disappointments.
But Paul didn't let these feelings defeat him.
He didn't give into the pressure.
Notice what he says next in verse 10.
But by God's undeserved kindness, I am what I am.
And his undeserved kindness to me was not in vain, but I labored more than all of them.
Yet it was not I, but the undeserved kindness of God that is with me.
So Paul realized that Jehovah accepted him for what he was.
And he knew that he couldn't change whatever happened in the past, no matter how much he might want to.
He accepted God's undeserved kindness and he let Jehovah use him.
Well, like Paul, we've repented over our past sins.
We've confessed them to the extent necessary.
So we can be sure too that Jehovah will be merciful with us.
Why?
Because Jehovah promises that he forgives in a large way.
So we can take him at his word and accept his forgiveness.
Now, we might refer to a second situation that makes people suffer as compassion guilt.
This is feeling guilty because you didn't do enough to help someone.
And caregivers often struggle with feelings like this.
Even when they're doing all they can to help, they sometimes feel guilty about not being able to do more.
One sister who was caring for her elderly parents said,
having to say, I can't take care of you anymore is extremely difficult.
What can help those in this situation?
Well, notice what Ecclesiastes 7 and verse 16 says we should all avoid.
Do not be overly righteous nor show yourself excessively wise.
Why should you bring ruin to yourself?
Another way we could put this is avoid becoming a perfectionist.
Conscientiousness can easily deteriorate into perfectionism.
If we're trying to do more than we want to, can do or even should do,
then we're only setting ourselves up for disappointment and failure.
To illustrate some people see caregiving as a way to repay their parents for all they did while they were growing up.
But if we see it that way, we're always going to feel guilty because we can never fully repay our parents.
Acting out of guilt will only drain us over time and make us less effective as a caregiver.
What can we do instead?
We can share the load.
Family, friends, neighbors and professionals can be of help.
But we have to ask for help and we have to ask directly for it, hence seldom work.
It may surprise us who and how many are willing to pitch in if we make our needs known.
Finally, a third situation that's paralyzing for some is imagined guilt.
This is guilt over something you think you did, but didn't.
For example, Teresa's daughter died in a car accident and she says,
I felt guilty that I had sent her out that night on an errand.
Another sister says that guilt that you feel during a divorce, even if you're not the guilty party, can be overwhelming.
What can someone do in this situation?
Well, first, it's important not to bottle up those emotions, share your feelings with a friend who really listened to you.
Allow them to reassure you that irrational feelings are common, especially when you're grieving.
But second, no matter how much we love someone, we can't control his or her life.
Remember what Ecclesiastes 9 and verse 11 says.
This is true for all of us.
I have seen something further under the sun that the swift do not always win the race, nor do the mighty win the battle, nor do the wise always have the food, nor do the intelligent always have the riches.
Nor do those with knowledge always have success, because time and unexpected events overtake them all.
So we are not to blame for things we cannot control.
Before you accuse yourself of wrongdoing, make sure that wrongdoing actually took place.
Talk it over with a trusted friend, and refocus your thoughts on the future, reflecting on all kinds of if only's won't change anything, and it may slow down your recovery.
Don't let inappropriate guilt control your life.
So in review, a guilty conscience can and should move us to confess our sins and to take positive action, but inappropriate guilt is dangerous.
It can crush our spirit and keep us from giving our best to Jehovah.
Don't let guilt paralyze you, concentrate all your energies on what you can do right now, and on what lies ahead.